---
layout: post
title: Sharpening stone
date: 2016-08-06
---
This weekend I thought a lot about the workbench, but didn't actually build anything. My
only accomplishment was to unpack the boxes and find all my wood-working tools.  That
makes it sound like I have lots of tools, but really I don't.  Anyhow, I unpacked what I
have, and though about what I will need to do to make a workbench, and decided that 
sharpening up the chisels would be a good thing to do.

My chisels have actually never been sharpened.  Each of them was bought, used until it was 
blunt, and put into the tool-box.  A couple of them I tried to sharpen with an angle-grinder,
but all I achieved was to overheat the steel and get the bevels out of shape.  That isn't
something I want to repeat, but if they are a bit messed-up, then they would be good to
experiment on.  So I watched lots of YouTube videos hoping to find the right way to sharpen 
chisels, and discovered that the world is full of crazy people who want to shave with their
chisels and believe that spending hundreds of pounds on fancy sharpening systems for cheap
chisels is a good investment.  For me, that amount of money buys twenty or thirty new chisels,
which would keep me stocked for a decade at least.  So instead, I bought a three pound 
combination stone, and a small tin of 3-in-1 oil, and tried to rediscover sharpening skills
from my early teenage years as a Boy Scout.

It took up the whole weekend, but I now have a set of nice sharp chisels.  They aren't razor 
sharp, but they cut wood well, and that is all they need to do.  The process is relatively
simple, even if time-consuming:

1. Flatten the back, grinding across the chisel, parallel to the edge. I 
didn't realise how badly formed some of the chisels were until I did this.
2. Shape the bevels, holding the chisel at a constant angle, and still
grinding parallel to the edge.  Keep grinding until the bevel is uniform 
and the edge is square to the sides.  You can check this against the light
with a combination or framing square.
3. Sharpen the edge, grinding away from the edge, starting at a shallow
angle (handle close to the stone) and increasing the angle from the start
to the finish of each stoke.  This creates a compound bevel, which is as
strong as the single-angle, micro-bevelled edge that all the fancy systems
try to achieve.  
4. Flatten the back again, to dress the edge properly. It only takes a
few strokes, and you will see a narrow, polished strip all along the edge.
Literally, it is a fraction of a millimeter, but you can see it clearly
when the edge is properly dressed.  I didn't use bevel-guides, or rubbing 
blocks, or leather strops, and I still got perfectly useable edges.

Sharpening is slow, but quite therapeutic. It can easily become work-avoiding
behaviour, though.  I really do need to make some progess on the workbench over 
the next couple of weekends.
